---
layout: post
published: false
title: Oasis Exodus
date: 2022/06/05
---

>Question

<!--more-->

([FiveThirtyEight](URL))

## Solution

The basic idea is that two travelers won't intersect so long as the one on the right makes a clockwise angle with the one on the left.

First, we can go quick and dirty to get an idea of how the solution should scale. 

# approximate argument

As $n$ gets big, about half the travelers will be on the top or bottom. Dividing the angular real estate into equal sized chunks, the travelers on the top pick an angle from $1/(\frac12 n)$ of the available angels on the average. The same goes for the travelers on the bottom.

So, the probability of no intersection is approximately $P(n) \approx 1/(n/2)^n =  2^n/n^n$ and, up to rescalings, we get $P(n) \sim n^{-n}.$

This shows the approximate $n$ dependence, but has the wrong scaling factor. Happily, the exact probability falls to a simple counting argument.

# counting argument

Really, the angle choices aren't so restricted — each traveler could pick an angle from the same small region and as long as they're in clockwise order there won't be any intersections. 

To start, assume the travelers pick their place on the line in some order.

Because every traveler starts on the line, nobody from the up side can possibly intersect with anyone on the down side. So, we just need either side to be correctly sorted. If there are $t_\text{up}$ travelers on the up side, and $t_\text{down}$ on the down side, then the probability each side is sorted correctly is $1/(t_\text{up}!t_\text{down}!).$ 

Going down the line, each traveler had even odds to point up or down, so the probability of any particular set of choices is $1/2^{t_\text{up}+t_\text{bottom}}.$ Also, we only care about the totals number of up and down pointers, not who they happen to be. Coarse graining, there are $\binom{t_\text{up} + t_\text{down}}{t_\text{up}}$ equivalent ways to pick $t_\text{up}$ up pointers and $t_\text{down}$ down pointers.

So, the chance of no intersections with a particular choice of $t_\text{up}$ and $t_\text{down}$ is

$$
  \frac{1}{2^{t_\text{up}+t_\text{down}}\sum_{t_\text{up}} \binom{t_\text{up}+t_\text{down}}{t_\text{up}} \frac{1}{t_\text{up}!}\frac{1}{t_\text{down}!}
$$

Obviously, $t_\text{up}$ and $t_\text{down}$ add up to $n$: $t_\text{up} + t_\text{down} = n$ so, putting it all together, we get 

$$
  P(n) = \frac{1}{2^n}\sum_{t_\text{up} = 0}^n \binom{n}{t_\text{up}} \frac{1}{t_\text{up}!}\frac{1}{n - t_\text{up}!}
$$

We can clean this up with a bit of massaging.

If we multiply the top and bottom by $n!,$ then we get a sum of squares of the binomial coefficient $\sum \binom{n}{t_\text{up}}^2.$

Binomial coefficients are generated by the expansion of $(1+x)^n$ — the coefficient of $x^t$ is $\binom{n}{t}.$ If we zipper up the coefficients of $x^1$ with $x^{n-1},$ $x^2$ with $x^{n-2}$ and so on, then we get the sum of squared binomial coefficients. 

If we multiply $(1+x)^n$ with itself, these squares will accumulate on the resulting $x^n$ term. However, $(1+x)^n\cdot(1+x)^n$ is the same as $(1+x)^{2n},$ whose $x^n$ coefficient is just $\binom{2n}{n}.$ 

So, the sum comes to $\binom{2n}{n},$ and our overall probability is 

$$
  \boxed{P(n) = \frac{1}{2^n n!}\binom{2n}{n}}
$$

Notably, up to scaling factors, this decays like $1/n^n.$


ddd

<br>
