---
layout: post
published: false
title: Buffon's checkerboard
date: 2022/10/05
subtitle: 
tags:
---

> This problem came across my feed purporting to be a Jane Street interview problem. Maybe it is, maybe it isn't, but it was a lot of fun.
> 
>**Question**: A random line segment of length $\ell$ is chosen on a plane marked with an infinite checkerboard grid (i.e., a unit side length square grid). What length $\ell$ maximizes the probability that the segment crosses exactly one line on the checkerboard grid, and what is this maximal probability?

<!--more-->

([FiveThirtyEight](URL))

## Solution

the intuition is that a very short stick (compared to the unit cell) is unlikely to cross **any** line on the checkerboard, because it's unlikely to land within striking distance of a line. likewise, a stick that's long compared to the unit cell will be likely to cross **more** than one line on the board. somewhere in the middle, there's a balance.

when the stick lands, it has some orientation $\theta$ and position. we'll take the location to be its left-most point $P.$ the problem is symmetric with respect to positive and negative angles, so we'll just consider angles from $0$ to $\pi/2$ and double the result. 

## Small sticks

to start, let's think about sticks with lengths between $0$ and $1.$ these are simple because the only way for them to have two crossings is to make one vertical crossing and one horizontal crossing. they aren't long enough to, e.g. make two horizontal crossings.

we can draw a box around the stick which will have side lengths $\ell\cos\theta$ on the bottom, and $\ell\sin\theta$ on the top. since the height of the box is $\ell\sin\theta,$ it will only cross the upper edge of the cell if $P$ is within $\ell\sin\theta$ of the top. so, the probability that it does not intersect the top is $(1 - \ell\sin\theta).$ 

by the same logic, the probability that the bar does cross horizontally is $\ell\cos\theta.s 

so, the chance that the bar intersects only one edge is 

$$
\begin{align}
  P(\text{one crossing}) &= 2P(\text{one horizontal crossing})\times P(\text{no vertical crossing}) \\
  &= 2\ell\cos\theta\left(1-\ell\sin\theta\right).
\end{align}
$$

averaging over all possible angles, the probability of a single intersection is then

$$
\begin{align}
  P(\text{one crossing}) &=2\frac{1}{\pi/2} \int\limits_0^{\pi/2} \ell\cos\theta(1-\ell\sin\theta)\text{d}\theta \\
  &= \frac{4}{\pi} \int\limits_0^{\pi/2} \left(\ell\cos\theta - \ell^2\cos\theta\sin\theta\right) \text{d}\theta \\
  &= \frac{4}{\pi}\left(\ell - \frac12\ell^2\right),
\end{align}
$$

a nice quadratic that rises until it flattens out at the upper range of our figuring above, $\gamma = 1.$ the result is nice and simple, we can increase the chance of one crossing until the stick is as long as the unit cell. past that and higher order crossings become more likely. 

so, the optimum stick length is just $\ell=1,$ and the maximum probability for one crossing is $\frac{4}{\pi}(1 \frac12) = 2/\pi\approx 0.6366$

plotting the distribution $P(\ell) = \frac{2}{\pi}\left(1 - \frac12\ell^2\right),$ we see great agreement inside the bounds of our analysis.




<br>
