---
layout: post
published: true
title: A chancy race
date: 2023/06/18
subtitle: Will the coiners flip before you roll?
tags: transformation stochastic
---

>**Question**: With The Riddler nearing its end here at FiveThirtyEight, I can finally get something off my chest: Starting a competition with the flip of a coin (say, to determine possession of a ball) is so boring!
>
>Instead, let’s give the captain of one team a fair coin and the captain of the other team a fair die. The captain with the coin will flip it at the same time the other captain rolls the die. They continue doing this until the coin is the same (whether heads or tails) for three consecutive flips or the number that comes face-up on the die is the same for two consecutive rolls.
>
>On average, how many coin flips will it take to get three in a row? And how many die rolls will it take to get two in a row?
>
>**Extra credit**: While the numbers of flips and rolls may often be the same, which team — the team with the coin or the team with the die — is more likely to win the toss/roll? (That is, which is more likely to happen sooner?)

<!--more-->

([FiveThirtyEight](https://fivethirtyeight.com/features/can-you-solve-middle-square-madness/))

## Solution

we can get the expected number of rolls by accounting for all the ways we can reach the end condition. 

### Die

for the die, we can either

- immediately repeat the first die, or
- not repeat the first die. in this case we restart the process with a roll under our belt.

so, if $T$ is the number of rolls after the first, we get

$$ T = p + (1 - p)(1 + T) = 1 + (1 - p) T $$

which leads to $T = 1/p$ and, restoring the first roll, the total expected rolls for a double is $T^\prime = 1 + 1/p  = 7.$

### Coin 

for the coin, we can 

- immediately proceed to the same side three times in a row, or
- get the same side two times in a row, before switching and restarting the game, or
- immediately switch sides, and restart the game.

if $T$ is the number of rolls required after the first, we get

$$ T = 2p^2 + p(1 - p)(2 + T) + (1 - p)(1 + T)$$

which leads to $T = (1 + p)/p^2 = 6$ and the total expected rolls for a triple is $T^\prime = 6 + 1 = 7.$

surprisingly, they have the same expectation.

### Who wins?

to evaluate the race of die rolling and coin flipping, we need to find the distribution of finish times for either medium.

the die is straightforward, every roll after the first has probability $(1-p)$ to not repeat, and probability $p$ to repeat. so, the probability that the die finishes on roll $t$ is simply 

$$ P^\text{die}_t(2) = (1-p)^{t-2}p. $$

for the coin, there are more interesting dynamics. if we find ourselves in a restarted game at time $t$ it is because we restarted immediately at time $(t-1)$ or because we got two in a row, and then reset at $(t-1).$

by contrast, we can find ourself with two repeats at time $t$ only if we were in a restarted game at time $(t-1).$

finally, if we finish the game at time $t$ it means we had two in a row at time $(t-1).$

putting this together, we get the transformation

$$ \left(\begin{array}{c}P_1(t) \\ P_2(t) \\ P_3(t)\end{array}\right) = \overbrace{\left(\begin{array}{ccc} (1-p) & (1-p) & 0 \\ p & 0 & 0 \\ 0 & p& 0\end{array}\right)}^\mathbf{M} \cdot \left(\begin{array}{c} P_1(t-1) \\ P_2(t-1) \\ P_3(t-1)\end{array}\right) $$

we can diagonalize this matrix so that

$$ \mathbf{P}_{t} = \mathbf{T}\mathbf{D}\mathbf{T}^{-1}\cdot\mathbf{P}_{t-1} $$

by placing the eigenvectors as the columns of $\mathbf{T}$ 

$$ \mathbf{T} = \left[\begin{matrix}0 & \frac{p \left(1 - p\right) + \frac{\left(p - 1\right) \left(p + \sqrt{- \left(p - 1\right) \left(3 p + 1\right)} - 1\right)}{2}}{p^{2}} & \frac{p \left(1 - p\right) - \frac{\left(p - 1\right) \left(- p + \sqrt{- \left(p - 1\right) \left(3 p + 1\right)} + 1\right)}{2}}{p^{2}}\\ 0 & \frac{- p - \sqrt{- \left(p - 1\right) \left(3 p + 1\right)} + 1}{2 p} & \frac{- p + \sqrt{- \left(p - 1\right) \left(3 p + 1\right)} + 1}{2 p}\\ 1 & 1 & 1\end{matrix}\right] $$

and the eigenvalues as the entries of $\mathbf{D}:$

$$ \mathbf{D} = \left[\begin{matrix}0 & 0 & 0\\ 0 & - \frac{p}{2} - \frac{\sqrt{- \left(p - 1\right) \left(3 p + 1\right)}}{2} + \frac{1}{2} & 0\\ 0 & 0 & - \frac{p}{2} + \frac{\sqrt{- \left(p - 1\right) \left(3 p + 1\right)}}{2} + \frac{1}{2}\end{matrix}\right]. $$

this makes it straightforward to generate the occupation of states $1,2,$ and $3$ over time, we just need to raise the entries of $\mathbf{D}$ to the power $t.$ plotting them on the same axes, we see state $1$ deplete into state $2$ and then state $3$ (the coin spends one time step in state 3 before being removed from the system):

### Head to head

with $P^\text{coin}_3(t)$ and $P^\text{die}_2(t)$ in hand, we can calculate the probability that the die roller beats the coin flipper.

the die roller wins if they reach $2$ of the same side in the row before the coin reaches three in a row. in other words,

$$ 
    \begin{align}
    P(\text{die wins}) &= P_2^\text{die}(2)\left[P_3^\text{coin}(3) + P_3^\text{coin}(4) + P_3^\text{coin}(5) + \ldots\right] \\ 
    &\, + P_2^\text{die}(3)\left[P_3^\text{coin}(4) + P_3^\text{coin}(5) + P_3^\text{coin}(6) + \ldots\right] + \ldots \\
    &= \sum\limits_{i=2}^\infty \sum\limits_{j=i+1}^\infty P_2^\text{die}(i)P_3^\text{coin}(j)
    \end{align}
$$

which comes out to approximately $ P(\text{die win}) \approx 0.491525\ldots$

an $N = 10^8$ yields an estimate $ \hat{P}(\text{die win}) \approx 0.491498\ldots$

<br>
