---
layout: post
published: true
title: Pick a circle any circle
date: 2024/02/19
subtitle: What chance is there, for a circle inside a square?
tags: conditional-probability transformations
---

>**Question**: A circle is randomly generated by sampling two points uniformly and independently from the interior of a square and using these points to determine its diameter. What is the probability that the circle has a part of it that is off the square? 

<!--more-->

([Jane Street]([URL](https://www.janestreet.com/puzzles/some-off-square-index/)))

## Solution

There are two ways to go after this problem. We can measure the volume of coordinate space devoted to interior circles, or we can go after the probability directly.

### Measurement

In the first approach, what we want to measure is 

$$ \int dx_1 \int dy_1 \int dx_2 \int dy_2\ \mathbb{I}(\text{diameter forms interior circle}\rvert x_1,x_2,y_1,y_2), $$

the volume of $(x_1,y_1,x_2,y_2)$-space that contributes to interior circles (diameters whose circle is contained in the unit square).

Instead of thinking in terms of the two points in $4$-space, we can think about the problem in terms of the center and radius of the resulting circle:

$$ \begin{align}
  x_c &= \frac12\left(x_1 + x_2\right) \\
  y_c &= \frac12\left(y_1 + y_2\right) \\
  x_r &= \frac12\left(x_1 - x_2\right) \\
  y_r &= \frac12\left(y_1 - y_2\right).
\end{align} $$

How many positions can the center take? For a circle of radius $r,$ the center can occupy any position inside the $(1-2r)$ by $(1-2r)$ sub-square inside the unit square. 

[ drawing of the (1-2r) by (1-2r) square with a few radius r circle drawn at particular points ]

Each point on the circle represents a pair (the point itself, and the point across from it on the same circle). The number of such pairs is proportional to the annulus of area $(2\pi r)\text{d}r$ about the center. 

Since we're just counting phase space, we can sum over all such centers and radii:

$$ P(\text{interior circle}) \propto \int dr\, 2\pi r(1-2r)^2. $$

But we need to be careful about the unit area in the new coordinates. In moving to the (center, separation) coordinate system, we stretch out each unit vector by a factor of $\sqrt{2}.$ 

[ drawing of the two grids overlaid ]

We can see this by calculating the magnitude of e.g. $d\vec{x}_c$ or by calculating the area element $dA = dx_1\,dx_2$ in terms of $dx_c$ and $dx_r.$

Taking a derivative, we get $d\vec{x}_c = \frac12\left(d\vec{x}_1 + d\vec{x}_2\right)$ which has magnitude $\frac12\sqrt{dx_1^2 + dx_2^2} = \frac{1}{\sqrt{2}}dx_1.$ 

Taking cross products, we get $dA = \lvert d\vec{x}_c\times d\vec{x}_r\rvert = \lvert\frac14\left(d\vec{x}_1\times d\vec{x}_2 + d\vec{x}_2\times d\vec{x}_1\right)\rvert = \frac{dx_1dx_2}{2},$ which gives us 

$$ dx_c\,dx_r = \frac12dx_1\,dx_2. $$

So, $dx_1\,dx_2\,dy_1\,dy_2 = 4dx_c\,dx_r\,dy_c\,dy_r.$ With this, we can finish the expression for the volume of phase space contributed by circles of diameter $2r:$

$$ dr\,4\times 2\pi r(1-2r)^2. $$

Integrating over all valid radii, we get 

$$ \begin{align}
  P(\text{interior circle}) &= 8\pi\int\limits_0^\frac{1}{2}dr\, r(1-2r)^2 \\
                            &= 8\pi \int\limits_0^{\frac12}dr\, \frac12\left[(1-2r)^2 - (1-2r)(1-2r)^2\right] \\
                            &= 2\pi \int\limits_0^1 du\, \left[(1-u)^2 - (1-u)^3\right] \\
                            &= \frac{\pi}{6}
\end{align} $$

And the probability that a random such circle overlaps the outside is 

$$ 1 - \frac{\pi}{6}. $$

This approach is nice apart from the unit area changing under our feet. 

### Probability

Let's write the probability that a random pair of points makes an interior circle as

$$ P(\text{interior}). $$

This is hard, but we can condition on the circles radius.

$$ P(\text{interior}) = \int dr\, P(\text{interior}\rvert r)P(r). $$

This gives us two new distributions to find, the probability that a random circle of radius $r$ is interior, and the probability that a random circle has radius $r.$

### Finding $P(r)$

Let's do the second piece first. Since we pick the points randomly, we can treat the $x$ and $y$ coordinates independently. 

[ drawing of two points separated by components 2r cos theta and 2r sin theta ]

The probability to get radius $r$ is the probability that the $x$ and $y$ components of the diameter form a vector of magnitude $2r.$ 

$$ P(\text{radius $r$}) = \int d\theta\, P(\text{$x_1-x_2 = 2r \cos\theta$})P(\text{$y_1-y_2 = 2r \sin\theta$}). $$

The probability that two random unit variables are separated by a distance $d$ is just $2(1-d).$ 

To see this, let's place two points a distance $d$ apart on a line with the left hand one starting out at the origin. There is $(1-d)$ worth of open space to slide them before the right hand point hits $1.$ Since we can swap the order of the points and get another valid arrangement, we get a factor of $2.$

[ diagram of this situation ]

Now, the angle of the diameter is random, so we have to average over it. Putting this all together, $P(r)$ is

$$ \begin{align}
  P($r$) &= 4\int\limits_0^{\frac12\pi} d\theta\, 4(1-2r\cos\theta)(1-2r\sin\theta) \\
  &= 8r(\pi -4(2-r)r). 
\end{align} $$

### Finding $P(\text{interior}\rvert r)

The next piece is straightforward in concept, but tricky to calculate. 

If we randomly place the center of the circle at coordinates $(x_c,y_c),$ what is the probability that it forms an interior circle?

As before, the circle will be interior if its center is more than one radius from the boundary. This means that the only circles with their center inside the $(1-2r)$ by $(1-2r)$ sub-square are interior. 

These are the only diameters that form interior circles. However, there are other diameters to consider.

First of all, no center can be within a radius of the square's boundary. This means that there are no valid centers inside the semi-circles of radius $r$ around each corner. But we can have valid centers "under" these semi-circles.

We can also have valid centers inside the four $r$ by $(1-r)$ rectangles around the central square.

Drawing what we've figured out so far, we have:

[ drawing of the three kinds of region ]

We know that $P(\text{interior}\rvert r)_\text{square} = 1,$ but we need to find $P(\text{interior}\rvert r)_\text{curve}$ and $P(\text{interior}\rvert r)_\text{rectangle}.$ 

---

the idea is, in each region, to calculate the fraction of possible orientations that lead to the circle being interior: $\theta_\text{valid}/\theta_\text{possible}.$

which each of these in hand, the probably that a circle of radius $r$ is interior is just

$$ P(\text{interior circle}\rvert\text{radius $r$}) = \frac{P(\text{square}\rvert r)}{P(\text{square}\rvert r) + 4P(\text{rectangle}\rvert r) + 4P(\text{curve}\rvert r)}. $$

**rectangular protuberance**

in the rectangular protuberance, we have a valid diameter so long as $x_c$ is further from the wall than $r\sin\theta.$

[ drawing of the situation in the rectangular protuberance ]

this defines a range of angles $(-\theta,\theta)$, between which the diameter won't cross the wall. solving $r\sin\theta = 1-x_c$ gives us $2\theta = 2\arcsin\left(\frac{1-x_c}{r}\right).$ since the angle is chosen at random, the probability that the diameter is valid is just 

$$\begin{align} 
  P_\text{rect}(\text{valid}\rvert x_c) &= 2\theta/\pi \\
  &= \frac{2}{\pi}\arcsin\left(\frac{1-x_c}{R}\right)
\end{align} $$

adding up over all possible values of $x_c,$ the probability of a diameter whose center is in the rectangle being valid is

$$ \begin{align}
  P_\text{rect}(\text{valid}) &= (1-2r)\int\limits_{1-r}^1 dx_c\, P_\text{rect}(\text{valid}\rvert x_c)  \\
  &= (1-2r)\int\limits_{1-r}^1 dx_c\, \frac{2}{\pi}\arcsin\left(\frac{1-x_c}{r}\right) \\
  &= \frac{(\pi-2)r(1-2r)}{\pi}. 
\end{align} $$

**under the curve**

when the center is in the region under the curve, the top and side of the square have distinct extreme angles. at the right wall, the diameter can tilt until $(1-x_c) = r\cos\theta_\text{right}.$ likewise, at the top we have $(1-y_c) = r\cos\theta_\text{top}.$ 

[ drawing of the situation under the curve ]

looking at the angles, this means that the diameter can wiggle through the angle $(\frac12\pi - \theta_\text{right} - \theta_\text{top}).$ 

if we push the diameter through the wall so that one end is in the corner, there is a second band of feasible angles. drawing the diagram, this has the same constraints we just went through. so the total feasible angle is just $2(\frac12\pi - \theta_\text{right} - \theta_\text{top}).$

[ drawing of the second situation ]

solving the equations, this gives

$$ P_\text{curve}(\text{valid}\lvert x_c,y_c) = \frac{1}{\pi}\left(\frac12\pi - \arccos\frac{1-x_c}{r} - \arccos\frac{1-y_c}{r}\right). $$

summing over $(x_c,y_c)$ gets us

$$ 
  \begin{align}
    P_\text{curve}(\text{valid}) &= \int\limits_{1-r}^1 dx_c\hskip{-0.65em}\int\limits_{1-r}^{1-\sqrt{r^2 - (x-1)^2}} \hskip{-0.7em}dy_c\, P_\text{curve}(\text{valid}\lvert x_c,y_c) \\
    &= \frac{(\pi-3)r^2}{2\pi}
  \end{align} 
$$
  
so, the probability that a randomly placed diameter $2r$ forms an interior circle is just

$$ P(\text{points form an interior circle}\rvert\text{diameter $r$}) = \frac{P(\text{square}\rvert r)}{P(\text{square}\rvert r) + 4P(\text{rectangle}\rvert r) + 4P(\text{curve}\rvert r)}. $$


<br>
